
===Literature===
&lt;!-- chronologically --&gt;
* [[Edgar Allan Poe]]'s ''[[The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket]]'' (1838), Chapter 15, has a detailed history and description of the island.
* In [[Jules Verne]]'s novel ''In Search of the Castaways,'' one of the chapters is set on Tristan da Cunha, and a brief history of the island is mentioned. The island is also referred to in Verne's novel ''The Sphinx of the Ice Fields'' (1897), which he wrote as an unauthorised sequel to Poe's ''The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket.'' The 1899 English translation by [[Frances Cashel Hoey|Mrs. Cashel Hoey]] of ''Ice Fields'' was published under the title ''An Antarctic Mystery''.
* South African poet [[Roy Campbell (poet)|Roy Campbell]] wrote &quot;Tristan de Cunha&quot; (1927) [http://markandrewholmes.com/tristan.html Tristan de Cunha], an elegiac poem about the island.
* Tristan da Cunha is the site of a top-secret nuclear disarmament conference in [[Fletcher Knebel]]'s 1968 political thriller ''[[Vanished (novel)|Vanished]].'' The book was adapted as a 1971 two-part [[NBC]] made-for-TV movie starring [[Richard Widmark]].
* [[Hervé Bazin]]'s novel ''Les Bienheureux de la Désolation'' (1970) describes the 1961 forced exile of the population to England after the volcano erupted, and their subsequent return.
* In [[Primo Levi]]'s memoir ''[[The Periodic Table (book)|The Periodic Table]]'' (1975), one of the fictional short stories, &quot;Mercurio&quot;, is set on Tristan da Cunha, named &quot;Desolation Island&quot;.
* In Patrick O'Brian's ''The Thirteen-Gun Salute'' (1991), the ship ''Dianne'' is nearly wrecked on Inaccessible Island.
* [[Robert A. Heinlein]]'s book ''[[Tramp Royale]]'' (1992), about a world trip in 1953–54, devoted a chapter to his near visit to Tristan da Cunha. He talked to islanders but could not go ashore owing to the weather. 
* [[Zinnie Harris]]'s play, ''Further Than the Furthest Thing'' (2000), is inspired by events on the island, notably the 1961 volcanic eruption and evacuation of the islanders.
* [[Raoul Schrott]]'s novel, ''Tristan da Cunha oder die Hälfte der Erde'' (2003), is almost entirely set on Tristan da Cunha and Gough islands, and chronicles the history of the archipelago.
* [[Alice Munro]]'s short story [[Deep-Holes]] in her 2009 short story collection [[Too Much Happiness]]. The female protagonist, a mother, confides to her young son about her fascination with remote islands like Trista da Cunha and the [[Faeroe Islands]]. Later, when her son goes missing, she fantasises that he has found his way to one of these islands and is living there.


